DNA is a complicated structure that contains the genetic code, which determine the characteristics of the human being. Sections of DNA are called genes, which codes for specific proteins by defining the order of amino acids. They are defined by a series of base pairs formed by 4 bases: A-T (adenine - thymine) and G-C (guanine - cytosine). Gene finding is “the process of identifying the regions of genomic DNA that encode genes”. The gene finder receives an input of a strand of the gene, which it reads to determine what amino acids and hence proteins are made. Begin by inputting a gene of your choice, composed of capital A’s, T’s, G’s and C’s. One example would be “ATGTGTACGCAAATGATATCGTATTAG”. The gene finder will process this gene, and output the amino acids (protein) created. In this example, it becomes “MetCysThrGlnMetIleSerTyr***”. There will also be a summary included that will help you understand this protein.

Transcription is the first process by which genes are read in the body. The base pairs of the genes (which was your first input) are transcribed into the mRNA (or messenger RNA, which is responsible for transporting the genetic information). A RNA copy is created for the mRNA, where the “T” (thymine) becomes “U” (uracil). As seen in the diagram, the mRNA  leaves the cell nucleus and enters the cytoplasm, where it directs the creation (synthesis) of the protein.

Translation is the second process by which genes are read in the body. In the cell cytoplasm, the mRNA (messanger RNA) from the transcription process is read by the ribosomes in groups of three (called a codon). Different codon combination codes for a different amino acids, which build up to create different proteins.

This is the table of codon combinations and corresponding amino acids.

There are three reading frames displayed. The first shows the protein created from the gene you inputted. The second and third show the protein created from the gene minus the first and the first two (respectively) bases removed. This allows you to see all the possible combinations of results (since they are read in groups of three). Above the reading frames, the original gene (you inputted), as well as the DNA complement  strand and RNA strand are printed. Within each frame, there are two main sections. The first section shows the RNA length, and RNA strand with the protein created. The second section is the summary, which helps you to interpret the result to choose the best frame. The best form of the gene should produce a protein with a Met at the beginning, a stop at the end and no interrupting stops. It doesn’t matter whether a Met is in the protein, because that is allowed.

Gene finding is the important first step in understanding the genome of a living thing once it is sequenced. By understanding the proteins that are created (and their uses), scientists are able to better understand how the human body works. Identifying gene mutations are also the first step in treating and curing genetic diseases caused by them.